Are we there, team?
Yep, I'm here. Mark. Hi Joe, how are you?
Good, thank you. Looking well,
Thank you.
Minister's here too, mark and me.
So we've got Minister Hoggard, is that correct now? Okay.
We've, we've jumped the shut. We've a few.
So we've got Joe, Steve Abel, um,
miles Anderson, are you online?
He's just coming on now. Thank you very much,
Joe.
Is there anyone, uh, uh, in your team beyond you?
So it's just Joe, yourself
and, um, Steve, there's no one else on your
team on there should be.
No, um, Rachel wasn't able to make this afternoon.
Okay. Well, to give you guys the best benefit, um,
I'm gonna ask the minister to keep his remarks quite short.
Um, I hope he can hear me now.
Yes. Yeah, I've got your mark.
Yeah, good to, good to see you, mate.
Um, we've obviously got you for 10 minutes.
We've got quorum. So there's, there's the opportunity
to proceed, uh, if Joe
and her side is happy, um, there seems
to be no objection, so we've got you for 10 minutes.
A Minister Hogar, if you could keep your introductory
remarks pretty brief, and I'm sure the crew
will have lots of questions for you.
Okay. I'll do exactly that then.
Um, I guess key point I wanna make clear is the main reason
for going through this process,
which is extraordinarily unusual, was simply
because we had to provide the industry
with certainty a transition period, uh,
further transition was needed, which, you know,
was not allowed under the act.
And so by going through this parliamentary route,
it gives us the ability to provide that transition period,
because these are major costs that the sector will need to
bear, and it's not gonna be an easy job for many of them
to make these changes to their infrastructure.
Uh, hence why we need to give them the, especially
for the grower space, that's probably the main one.
And, um, that's why it's so important
that we give them this transition period
so they can make those adjustments to buildings.
Uh, I'll leave it at that.
That's I guess, the key point I wanna raise.
Thank you, minister. Um, thank you Frank.
So very, very, very succinct.
Um, Steve Abel and Joe launch into questions.
We only have, uh, said minister for 10 minutes,
so use your time as best as you can.
Yeah, thank you. Um, obviously I've got a couple
of questions if I can get them in. Um, yes,
Please.
Why have you left it so late?
Minister, given this deadline has been looming
for five years, the, the deadline of 18th of December, um,
was well known to you when you came into, uh, the, the job.
So why did you leave it till this very 11th hour to rush
through a change?
So basically last year was going through the discussions
with the pork industry in terms of what would work
and, uh, getting advice from officials.
And then this year has pretty much been working through, um,
how this progresses forward.
And there was, uh, didn't want to have to go
through this route, um, would've much preferred
to do it a much more simpler and normal way,
but these were the only option.
And once we exhausted all other options,
this was the only option left.
So this is the route that we've taken,
uh, would've loved to have.
I mean, I made my mind up, um, reasonably quickly once it,
that consultation had happened.
The rest of it's been the paperwork
and drafting and all the rest of it.
I up on that Mr. Chair. Yes, yes, of course.
Yes, of course. So, um, I I thought I unfair
that clarifies why this process that we've gone
through at the select committee couldn't have happened,
you know, sooner.
But, um, on the point of the consultation,
you've repeatedly said that you did consult
with the animal welfare sector in the last year
of consultation, but they are very clear
that they haven't been consulted with. Um,
No, I've never said that.
Uh, I mean, I've said they've been consulted with not by,
so I mean they had the opportunity through the NAAC process
and their, their points were very clear, uh,
In 2022. You mean
Naac process and those submissions.
So it was pretty obvious where they stood. Um, and yeah,
Just to be clear, you mean in the 2022 consultation?
Yeah, yeah. And obviously
as the process went through, yeah.
So it's correct to say that in this latest proposal
that you've worked closely with the pork industry on
you hadn't included
Primarily I've worked very closely
with the NPI staff in terms of their advice,
and, um, they've been the ones doing the consultation
with New Zealand Pork to find out a, you know,
what will work to provide a sustainable pathway
for the New Zealand pork industry.
I got one final quick question, if that's all right. Mr.
Um, how is it that even
after these changes are brought into place in 10 years time,
that they will meet our welfare standards?
A number of people submitters have made the point
that in fact, increasing the cage by, uh,
a certain size still will not meet the bar
of our Animal Welfare Act.
So what advice do you have that, that it will do that?
Well, I mean, this is why,
this is another reason why we're going
through this process is
because it's important
that we actually balance up the welfare of the piglets.
It's the, the science shows
that you have a 14% greater mortality risk.
And so I'm looking at balancing not just this,
not just focus solely on the sales welfare,
but also the piglets welfare.
And it, that's, that's what farming's all about.
It's trying to find that balance to come
to the ideal outcome.
Thank you Steve Abel
and minister, uh, Joe, you've got a question?
Yep. Um, thank you.
Um, thank you for your time this afternoon, minister.
My question for you is what,
if anything has changed or had changed in the sector
and the advice that was currently would've been put
before you when you first became the minister?
Which is the same advice that was put
before me when I was minister with several options,
but quite close to an election.
So it wasn't fair to make a decision that would mean that
as incoming minister you would have to adhere to that.
What advice changed that has meant that you have, um,
this process has taken that much longer
and you sought to kind of, I guess, re-go
through that whole process.
And again, uh, might have been similar to
what Steve asked is why was SPCA left
out of this round?
You said that they participated in the 2022 round.
Why were they left out of this round since you went through
that process again?
Uh, in terms of the, so I'm not
sure whether or not you would've had all the economic advice
in front of you at the time.
For me, that was, you know, I was looking at
three different scenarios with some really,
really hefty costs for an industry.
And at the forefront of my mind was Jesus,
will this industry be able to survive these costs?
And so I wanted to make sure that we had, um, ensure
that we came out with a solution
that would be sustainable for this industry.
You know, the risk is that
even the costs we're proposing may be far too much for some.
And so the key thing for me was it's such a small industry.
If we lose potentially half
or a third of this industry,
does it even have the critical mass carry on in terms
of sort of slaughter space?
So look, a big part of my thinking was, um, we really needed
to tease that out and make sure we had
all the best information.
Um, the advice I, you know, from MPI was, uh, let us go
and talk to the industry
and, you know, see if they could meet, have, you know,
there was the Naac position, the NPI position
and the pork position.
Uh, they wanted to try and get themselves both NPI
and Pork New Zealand on the same page.
And so that was what they went off and did.
And sorry, what was your last question?
The, uh, p yeah, SC this time.
Look, I've met with them six times.
Um, they could have, if they wanted to raise the issue,
they could have, they did at the last meeting where I said,
yep, well, I'm aware of the date
and we will be improving the welfare.
Um, obviously it was in front of cabinet,
so I couldn't really, um,
go into any more detail at that time.
Would you accept though, minister that you, um, uh,
consulted with this with the pork industry itself, uh,
proactively, but, um, this was somewhat, uh,
SPA was somewhat blindsided by this,
and they were, it wasn't, um, you didn't seek to engage
with them specifically on this topic.
It was only when they came to you being aware that the,
the date of in December was looming.
So it seems that would seem as if they've been completely,
uh, shut out almost on purpose.
And just finally, very quickly, sorry Mr. Chair. Two minutes
Left, two minutes left here. Thank you.
Why 10 years when it's been said
that's five years would be sufficient
and appropriate for these, um, this time to,
to be the timeframe?
Okay, so in terms of why consult very closely
with the pork sector because they're the ones impacted.
They're the ones that are gonna be paying somewhere between,
you know, the potential costs.
Were $1.6 million per farm to $600,000 per farm.
Those are the people that are gonna be potentially put outta
business or have to wear a massive cost
and completely turn their businesses upside down.
So, and, and come up with solutions that will work.
So that was why I focused on them,
because it was gonna hit them the hardest.
And in terms of why 10 years?
Well, great example would be the business I've just visited
an hour ago where they had to,
they've been waiting seven years for a consent.
These changes are gonna be big changes
and they're gonna need new consents.
And we have an absolute mess of a system at the moment, uh,
where people are struggling to get consents.
So a big part of it was we need
to get these RMA changes enacted
and in place so that people will be able
to progress through this system.
You know, you know what that,
that $600,000 cost is for the infrastructure.
Um, we're seeing farmers, particularly here in Canterbury,
paying 50,000 for a simple consent renewal up
to $200,000 if ECA wanna make it difficult.
Now, undoubtedly, you know, pig farm,
it's quite a complex issue.
You could add on another couple of hundred thousand on terms
of costs if we push them to try
and do it all through the current system.
So part of it was let's have the new system in place,
particularly for the, and it's mainly that grower space
because that is gonna be major works to rebuild sheds.
Um, I think the other things can probably be done faster
and quicker, but that grower space definitely needed it
or the wier space, sorry, definitely needed
that 10 years in my opinion. Mr.
Chair for another quick one.
Sorry, we very succinctly we've,
but if you can an ask the question,
and I'm sure the minister will be succinct, minutes is up.
I think the concern is, minister,
that you are the one member of the government
who is responsible for animal welfare
and you've prioritized consulting
with the pork industry over independent animal welfare
organizations and experts in regard to an issue that is
to do with meeting the animal welfare needs
of farmed mother pigs and piglets.
And you have not prioritized animal
welfare is the perception.
Well, I would disagree in the fact
that we've had good scientific evidence
that's informed this decision, that does show that,
you know, you will have, um,
piglet losses quite substantial.
And so this is part of the change of ensuring that we get
that balance between welfare.
We're improving the welfare outcomes.
Let's be clear, none of the countries we pork, pork from
will be, uh, near anywhere near our level of welfare.
So we will have leading welfare.
Yes, there's a couple of Scandinavian countries
that are highly subsidized that, um, will have slightly
more generous terms,
but these will be world leading animal welfare
outcomes for our pig sector.
But hopefully they will still be affordable
for our pig farmers to ensure we still
do have a pig industry.
Thank you, minister. We have met time, uh, general, um,
and ladies online.
Thank you minister for your time time's very precious.
We're very grateful for it. No worries.
Um, and we thank you sir for, uh, your comments.
We'll now move on to next submitter.
I'm sorry, I'm not cognizant of who the next submitter was.
Uh, given the list has changed
from this morning. I think
We're back at two. Uh, Mr. Chair?
Yeah, there's, there's no more on subcommittee A two 30.
Yeah. So subcommittee B will meet a bit later on
this afternoon, two
30 resolved to be finished, is that correct?
Yeah. So subcommittee B meets two 30.
Two 30. Okay.
So, um, our C committee is resolved to finish
and that's the end of it.
Thanks, mark.